Consumer packaged goods (CPG) are low-cost products that experience depletion upon each use [2].
Packaged food, beverages, and toiletries are examples of CPGs. There is growing industry interest
in moving CPGs towards the Internet of Things [7]; so that CPGs could collect information about
their use and provide extra functionalities such as helping to reduce waste, supporting proper product
usage, and enhancing the experience of using the products, among others.
Figure 1: The participant cooking a meal.
Until now there has not been a structured attempt to develop smart versions CPGs that fit into
the practices (a specific ways of conducting a routine [11]) they are part of. Current smart CPGs are
designed for a specific CPG and for specific situations of use (see examples [1, 10, 12]). We believe
that a practice perspective [6] is useful to first understand how CPGs are used, and then based on
that understanding develop design interventions [3].
Here we aim to investigate whether it is possible to gain insights into how to develop design
interventions for CPGs by understanding the use of CPGs in practice. For this purpose we develop a
variety of methods, inspired by previous research, to represent the usage of CPGs. We took cooking
as our research case an autoethnographic data sample [5] to demonstrate the application of our
methods.
METHODS AND DATA SAMPLE
Table 1: Items Usage Counting: the tree
most and least used CPGs and utensils.
CPGs f Utensils f
1 water 7 1 palette 13
2 fish 5 2 lid 7
3 greens 4 3 pan 7
17 parley 1 11 google home 2
18 peas 1 12 plate 2
19 salt 1 13 knife 1
Notes. f = frequency of item usage (number
of times item was used during the cooking
session; Total number of CPGs = 19; Total
number of utensils = 13.
Data Sample
An author of this paper recorded a video of himself cooking a meal (a vegetables and fish dish). The
video captured most of the participant’s activities from cooking preparation until serving the meal
(See Figure 1).
Methods
CPGs Inventory. The first step to understand CPGs’ use is to know what CPGs are available in a
person’s kitchen. Here, we created an inventory by recording an additional video of the CPGs in the
participant’s kitchen. We included in the inventory CPGs that belong exclusively to the participant
(personal) and CPGs that any member of the participant’s house could use (shared). In addition,
to have an idea of the time that an item could be available, if not consumed, we included a rough
estimate of the expected shelf life of CPGs: short (< 2 weeks) and long (> 2 weeks).
Item Usage Counting. To attempt to know what and how relevant CPGs were for the cooking session,
we noted the CPGs used in the cooking session and the number of times that they were used, inspired
in part by [4]. We also include utensils in this counting, because they are closely associated to the use
of CPGs. We considered only when items (CPGs and utensils) were used to accomplish something.
Finding Design Opportunities for Smartness in Consumer Packaged Goods
For example, when the participant grabbed a bottle of salt to add it to food, an usage of the salt was
recorded, however, when the bottle of salt was moved to reach another spice, no usage was recorded.
Table 2: CPGs’ Affordances.
CPGs Affordances
greens o,a,h,ct,p,s,d
water a,cl
kale o,a,h,p,s
fish o,a,h,p,s,d
oil o,c,a, h,s
peas o,a,h,p
red lentils a,h,p
squash o,a,h,p,s
parsley o,a,s
black pepper o,c,a,s
butter o,c,a,h,ct
soap a,cl
sponge cl
cloth cl
salt o,a,s
chilli powder o,a,s
cajun powder o,a,s
basil dried o,c,a,s
milk o,c,a,s
Notes. o = opening, c = closing,
a = adding, h = heating, ct = cutting, p = positioning, cl = cleaning, s = storing, and d = disposing of.
CPGs’ Affordances. To get an understanding of how CPGs are used in a cooking session, we looked
for CPGs’ affordances. An affordance is the relationship between the properties of an object and the
capabilities of a person that determine how the object could be used [8]. In other words, the actions
that a person could accomplish using an object. We noted the affordances that each of the CPGs used
in the cooking session by examining the cooking session video.
Consumption Estimation. To have an estimate of whether the CPGs could be used in more than one
cooking session, we made an evaluation of whether the CPGs were used or used up. The estimates
were made by the researcher through a visual inspection of the videos and his knowledge of the
cooking session. An example of estimation is a bag of frozen green; if half of the content of the bag
was consumed, but still, product remains in the bag which it was considered that was used.
Network Visualizations. CPGs are not used in isolation, but rather in combination with other CPGs
and utensils. To understand how people accomplish the work of cooking using CPGs and utensils,
we represented visually all the relevant interactions that those items have between them, using
Ognyanova source code [9]. As an illustrative example, for an onion that was sliced, we may have
noted the following interactions: onion-chopping board, knife-onion, knife-chopping board, etc.
Categorization of Specific Interactions. To capture situations that poses difficulties that the participant
has to solve (trouble) or situations in which a creative or insightful technique helped to accomplish
an activity (opportunity). We examine the videos to find and classify the interactions into those two
categories according to our own subjective criteria. A trouble interaction was having to remove an
extra amount of an ingredient while an example of an opportunity interaction was using an empty
package as temporary rubbish.
DEMONSTRATIONS
CPGs Inventory. The participant had a total of 156 available CPGs, of which 81 (51.9%) were personal
and 75 (40.1%) were shared. Of the 156 total CPGs, 24 (15.4%) were perishable and 132 (84.6%) were
non-perishable. The participant used 19 CPGs in the cooking session; 12 (63.2%) personal and 7 (36.8%)
shared. Out of those 19 CPGs, 7 were perishable (36.8%), and 12 non-perishable (63.2%). The results
suggest that the participant used a greater percentage of shared and perishable CPGs than their
percentage in regards to the total number of CPGs.
Item Usage Counting. The participant used 19 unique CPGs in 46 occasions with a minimum of 1 and
maximum of 7 interactions (mean = 2.42, SD = 1.66). The most used CPGs were water, fish, and greens
Finding Design Opportunities for Smartness in Consumer Packaged Goods
and red lentils. The participant interact with 13 unique utensils in 60 occasions with a minimum of 1
and maximum of 13 interactions (mean =4.61, SD =2.97). The most used utensils were a palette, lid,
and pan. The results suggest that both CPGs and utensils are used multiple times in a cooking session
and that utensils are used more times than CPG.
Table 3: CPGs Consumption Estimation.
CPGs portion consumed
greens 1/1 (up)
water NA
kale 1/3
fish 2/3
oil dash
peas 1/4 (up)
red lentils 1/4 (up)
butternut squash 1/6
parsley pinch
black pepper pinch
butter pinch
soap dash
sponge wear
cloth wear
salt pinch
chilli powder pinch
cajun powder pinch
basil dried pinch
milk dash
Notes. portion consumed in relation to
a CPG package; up = used up; Items arranged from top to bottom according to
the order they were used.
CPGs’ Affordances. We found 9 CPGs’ affordances: opening, closing, adding, heating, cutting, positioning, cleaning, storing, and disposing of. The most common affordance was "adding" and the least
were "disposing of" and "cutting" with occurrences in 17 and 2 CPGs respectively (Table 2). "Greens"
had the most affordances (7) and "sponge" and "cloth" had the least (2) . Interestingly, spices (salt, chili
powder, cajun, basil, and black pepper) have similar affordances with opening, closing and storing.
The results suggests alike CPGs share many affordances, indicating that similar CPGs may be used in
a similar manner.
Consumption Estimation. We found that 3 of the 19 CPGs were used up, those being greens, peas, and
red lentils (Table 3). Only 5 CPGs had a considerable used that is a relevant proportion of its total. For
instance, a third of a kale package was consumed. For the other 13 CPGs, the consumption was a
negligible part, for instance, a pinch of salt. The results suggests that most CPGs could be used more
than one time, which is particularly true for non-perishable CPGs.
Network Visualizations. The size of a node represents the number of interactions it had with other
items and the edges represent interactions between nodes (See Figure 2). The proximity of nodes’
centers inversely correlates with the number of interactions between them. The visualization gives a
sense for the way items were used during a given cooking session; on the left side, the spices form
a cluster that connects to food (lentils and squash). We could infer that those spices were used to
season food. There are nodes that have a prominent size as they are connected to a large number of
items. Palette is a central node and we could infer that it had a central role in the cooking process.
Categorization of Specific Interactions. We found a total of 9 interactions in the cooking session of
those 3 represent trouble interactions and 6 opportunity interactions (Table 4). Next, we provide a
detailed description and a digital intervention idea for one trouble and one opportunity interactions:
Fixing meal (as an opportunity) This refers to all actions related to improving the taste of food.
Examples include seasoning the food, add extra ingredients or changing the cooking method.
Intervention idea: CPGs could provide support to users about how to season food. While a person
is cooking a meal, CPGs could indicate that they go well with a food.
Unorthodox action (as a trouble) Actions on which the person makes an unorthodox use of
CPGs or utensils. Using a knife to get a portion of mayonnaise from a jar is an example of this.
Intervention idea: CPGs could take advantage of the hidden unorthodox use of their products.
CPGs could be re-designed to better adapt to the ways that people use.
Finding Design Opportunities for Smartness in Consumer Packaged Goods
Figure 2: Network visualization that represents the interactions between CPGs and utensils during a cooking session.
The classification of the interactions could represent areas for design opportunities as could give
designers and researcher situations worth to explore.
DISCUSSION
Our proposed methods suggest that it is possible to get an understanding of how CPGs are used
by focusing on different perspectives and granularity of CPGs usages. Such understanding could
inspire different interventions, ranging from general (identifying available CPGs in the kitchen) to
Finding Design Opportunities for Smartness in Consumer Packaged Goods
specific (revealing the formation of clusters of CPGs). An example of an intervention could be the
development of a system that recommends recipe meals based on the available CPGs at home. This
could be accomplish by equipping CPGs with low cost sensors that allows them to communicate with
a system at home to indicate their presence.
Table 4: Trouble and Opportunity Interactions: short description, frequency and
trouble to opportunity ratio
Category f (T:O)
1 CPGs and utensils placing 2(0:2)
positioning CPGs and/or utensils
2 fixing meal 2(1:1)
actions to improve food taste
3 unhygienic action 2(2:0)
not being clean enough
4 extra activities 1(0:1)
activities carried out while waiting
5 unorthodox action 1(0:1)
actions that deviate from the norm
6 use of technology 1(0:1)
use of devices with computational power
Notes. f = frequency of category out of a total of 9
interactions; T:O = trouble to opportunities ratios.
The main limitation of our study is the lack of implementations. Although we used a data sample
as a way to demonstrate our results, we have not applied our methods in a large number of people,
and as now the potential of our methods are only speculations. The results and the applications of
our methods may vary with a large number of people and with a longer implementation. We could
expect, for instance, our way of counting the interactions between CPGs and utensils to be very time
consuming and that may restrict the application in a large number of people.
To summarize, the methods proposed in this paper appear to represent in a fairly acceptable manner
how CPGs are used and provide insights for design interventions. As with any attempt to represent
the real world, those methods may focus on as well as exclude some information. We may argue
for the implementation of the methods in a large number of people. Our immediate next steps will
involve both the inclusion of more participants and working towards refining our analysis methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Horizon Centre for Doctoral Training at the University of Nottingham
(UKRI Grant No. EP/P510592/1) and by Unilever UK Ltd